head	4.3;
access;
symbols
	Puzzle-1_09:4.3
	Puzzle-1_08:4.2
	Puzzle-1_07:4.2
	Puzzle-1_06:4.2
	Puzzle-1_05:4.2
	Puzzle-1_04:4.2
	RO_3_71:4.1.3.1
	MergeFiles:4.1.3.1
	RO_3_70:4.1.3.1
	StrongARM:4.1.3;
locks; strict;
comment	@# @;


4.3
date	2015.09.15.20.01.42;	author rsprowson;	state Exp;
branches;
next	4.2;
commitid	AZCeMUzEl33K4oBy;

4.2
date	2003.02.21.20.29.41;	author srevill;	state Exp;
branches;
next	4.1;

4.1
date	96.11.05.19.36.36;	author nturton;	state Exp;
branches
	4.1.3.1;
next	;

4.1.3.1
date	96.11.05.19.36.36;	author nturton;	state Exp;
branches;
next	;


desc
@@


4.3
log
@Consistency improvements
Rename dangerous looking "Reset" button to "Default" to match the !Configure plugins.
Change "Default" button behaviour such that only Select click does something (restore factory defaults) rather than confusing reload existing/restore factory with Select/Adjust.
Don't double translate the templates - previously PROClabelwindows would change all the text via the Messages file.
References to "View" window in the !Help changed to "Display" options window.

Spotted while updating User Guide chapter.

Version 1.09. Tagged as 'Puzzle-1_09'
@
text
@                          !Puzzle
                          =======

Puzzle displays a sliding block puzzle for you to solve.
Initially you will presented with a fifteen-tile puzzle, but
you can increase the puzzle's size if you wish (see below). To
move the tiles, click on a tile which is in the same row or
column as the blank square: the tile(s) will be moved towards
the blank. Move the tiles until they are in order from left to
right, top to bottom, like so:

               1  2  3  4
               5  6  7  8
               9 10 11 12
              13 14 15

To create a new (random) layout, click Menu over the puzzle
window and choose the 'New board' option. If you want a
tougher challenge, move the pointer to the right from this
menu item to reveal the 'Board size' window, where you can
increase the size of the puzzle.

The appearance of the puzzle may be customised by choosing the
'Display...' option from the puzzle window's menu. You may choose
the font to be used for the numbers on the puzzle tiles, the
font size, and the colours of the numbers and tiles. Puzzle is
set up initially to display a chequered effect when solved by
the use of alternating tile colours, but if you find this
distracting, or wish to alter the colour scheme, edit the
colours to taste by using the 'Display options' window.

Choosing 'Save choices' from Puzzle's icon bar menu will
record your choice of board size and display settings to disc;
they will be restored automatically when you load Puzzle again
in future.

The rest of this document describes how to solve the puzzle,
so only read on if you get really stuck!

Solution
--------

Any puzzle of this form (a square grid of any size with one
blank tile missing) can be solved by arranging the outer ring
of tiles correctly, then arranging the next ring of tiles and
so on:

First:

              1  2  3  4
              5  ?  ?  8
              9  ?  ? 12
             13 14 11 15

Then arrange the three tiles in the middle:

              1  2  3  4
              5  6  7  8
              9 10    12
             13 14 11 15

Then shift the blank to the bottom right (move 11 up and then
15 to the left).

The blank must end up in the bottom right position, but it is
needed while solving the inner rings. The initial layout of
each outer ring therefore takes one tile from an inner ring
(the bottom right tile in that ring in the final arrangement)
and positions it temporarily one square downwards. Finally,
when the inner ring has been solved, the blank must be
positioned at the bottom right of the inner ring:

                 T  T
                 T  B

(B is the Blank, T is the appropriate Tile for that position).
Then, the tile below the blank is moved up, the one to the
right of the new blank position moved to the left, and so on
until the blank is in the bottom right.

Notice that, if the puzzle has an odd number of tiles along
each side, the inner ring will have only one tile. The
solution described in this document deals with this by solving
the two innermost rings (nine tiles) specially; see below.

To solve each ring, get the corners into position first.
Remember that that bottom right corner needs to be the tile
which will be one position to the left in the final
arrangment. With the fifteen-tile puzzle:

              1  ?  ?  4
              ?  ?  ?  ?
              ?  ?  ?  ?
             13  ?  ? 15

Now solve each of the sides. Remember that the tile to the
left of the bottom right corner comes from the ring of tiles
inside the one you are currently solving.

To solve a single side, start at one end (it doesn't matter
which) and shift tiles into the correct places until you get
to the last-but-one tile. Put this tile in the position of the
last tile, and put the last tile to the inside of this one,
ensuring that the blank is still inside the ring which you are
completing. Notice that, for the fifteen-tile puzzle, the
last-but-one tile is the first one, so you must start at this
step:

              1  T  2  4
              T  ?  3  T
              T  ?  ?  T
             13  T  T 15

? is any tile or blank; T is any tile, but not the blank. Now
move the tile in the last-but-one position out (put the blank
at this position), then move the tile at the last position
into the last-but-one (2) and move the last tile into position
(3).

Repeat this for each side.

When you get to the innermost ring with a puzzle with an even
number of tiles along each edge, you should find that, when
the blank is at the bottom right corner, the other tiles are
in the correct place; if not, someone has tampered with the
puzzle (by taking it apart) and rearranged the tiles! It is
impossible to solve the puzzle in this case.

The RISC OS Puzzle will not do this, unless someone has
tampered with the program!

If the puzzle has an odd number of tiles along each edge, you
will eventually get to a position where you only have nine
tiles left to do (the two innermost rings). Solve these by
solving the left and top edges first.

First get the top leftmost tile into position, then the two
remaining tiles along the top: position the middle tile at
the right, the rightmost tile below it, then move the blank to
the middle position, move the middle tile into place and then
the top rightmost tile. Now position the two remaining tiles
on the left edge in the same way. At this point you will have
three tiles and the blank left to position: move the blank
around until all three tiles are in the correct positions.
@


4.2
log
@Now does it with outline fonts not the system font,plus some other
UI changes (eg.can choose block colour - whoopie).
Sources from Richard Hallas,who seems to have been randomly updating and
rereleasing this of his own accord.

Version 1.04. Tagged as 'Puzzle-1_04'
@
text
@d24 1
a24 1
'View' option from the puzzle window's menu. You may choose
d30 1
a30 1
colours to taste by using the 'View options' window.
@


4.1
log
@Initial revision
@
text
@d1 2
a2 2
         !Puzzle version 0.53 (31-Jan-95)
         ================================
d4 7
a10 6
!Puzzle displays a fifteen tile sliding block puzzle
for you to solve.  To move the tiles click on a tile
which is on the same row or column as the blank
square - the tile will be moved towards the blank.
Move the tiles until they are in order from left to
right, top to bottom:
d17 30
a46 10
To get a new (random) layout use the pop-up menu.
The rest of this document describes how to solve
the puzzle - don't read any further yet!



Any puzzle of this form (a square grid of any size
with one tile missing - the blank) can be solved by
arranging the outer ring of tiles correctly, then
arranging the next ring of tiles and so on:
d62 2
a63 2
Then shift the blank to the bottom right (move
11 up and then 15 to the left).
d65 25
a89 29
The blank must end up in the bottom right position,
but it is needed while solving the inner rings -
so the initial layout of each outer ring takes one
tile from an inner ring (the bottom right tile in
that ring in the final arrangement) and positions it
temporarily one square downwards.  Finally (when the
inner ring has been solved) the blank must be
positioned at the bottom right of the inner ring:-

                  T  T
                  T  B

(B is the Blank, T is the appropriate Tile for that
position).  Then, the tile below the blank is moved
up, the one to the right of the new blank position
moved to the left and so on until the blank is in
the bottom right.

Notice that, if the puzzle has an odd number of
tiles along each side, the inner ring will have only
one tile.  The solution described in this document
deals with this by solving the two inner most rings
(nine tiles) specially - see below.

To solve each ring get the corners into position
first.  Remember that that bottom right corner
needs to be the tile which will be one position to
the left in the final arrangment.  With the fifteen
tile puzzle:-
d96 22
a117 25
Now solve each of the sides.  Remember that the
tile to the left of the bottom right corner comes
from the ring of tiles inside the one you are
currently solving.

To solve a single side start at one end (it doesn't
matter which) and shift tiles into the correct
places until you get to the last but one tile.
Put this tile in the position of the last tile and
put the last tile to the inside of this one ensuring
that the blank is still inside the ring which you
are completing.  Notice that, for the fifteen tile
puzzle, the last but one tile is the first one; so
you must start at this step:

           1  T  2  4
           T  ?  3  T
           T  ?  ?  T
          13  T  T 15

? is any tile or blank, T is any tile, but not the
blank.  Now move the tile in the last but one
position out (put the blank at this position), then
move the tile at the last position into the last
but one (2) and move the last tile into position
d122 6
a127 7
When you get to the inner most ring with a puzzle
with an even number of tiles along each edge you
should find that when the blank is at the bottom
right corner the other tiles are in the correct
place - if not someone has tampered with the puzzle
(by taking it apart) and rearranged the tiles.  It
is impossible to solve the puzzle in this case.
d129 1
a129 1
!Puzzle will not do this, unless someone has
d132 13
a144 23
If the puzzle has an odd number of tiles along each
edge you will eventually get to a position where you
only have nine tiles left to do (the two innermost
rings).  Solve these by solving the left and top
edges first.

First get the top leftmost tile into position, then
the two remaining tiles along the top - position the
middle tile at the right, the rightmost tile below
it, then move the blank to the middle position, move
the middle tile into place and then the top
rightmost tile.  Now position the two remaining
tiles in the left edge in the same way.  At this
point you will have three tiles and the blank left
to position, move the blank round until all three
tiles are in the correct position.

!Puzzle only implements the fifteen tile puzzle.
If you want to try other combinations you will
either have to make your own (using cardboard and
a big pair of scissors) or, if you have sufficient
expertese, by altering the !Puzzle program (which
is written in BASIC).
@


4.1.3.1
log
@Import from cleaned 370 CD
@
text
@@
